Q: I have flake.nix and flake.lock uploaded in a github repo, I downloaded the repo,
I do flake update on this and it generates a different lock file. What do I do with that?
It doesn't work unfortunately. 

A: So yeah, nix flake update does regenerate the lock file. Did you want to update the lock file? 
Or what is the intention that you are trying to get at?

Q: The intention to fulfill here is to update one of the libraries that's

A: aah, so you want to update just one dependency not all of them?

Q: Yes, but on the other hand, I thought that when you have lock file which is up to date,
so updated, it is better practice than you know everything. 

A: Ahm, yeah, so you can.. if we look at the man pages `man nix flake`, if you want the nix flake
man page it can be `man nix3 flake` (??) 

So this updates the flake lock file.. so I guess nix flake update updates all the things all the time,
and `nix flake lock --update-input nixpkgs` updates a single one. Does this answer a part of your
question?

Q: Yes, the part where I want to update the particular dependency of my flake, but then the question 
about the practice remains. 

A: Like whether you want to always have the flake lock up to date, right? So I think it's good to, always have
an up to date flake lock, and as long as you make sure to commit these updates to the repository and have CI
run on those, and make sure they still build, and if you get failures you try to fix them, then I think it's 
great, but if you have a project that rarely updates, that's like an archive of sorts, like you just want to
keep working forever the same it does right now, and have any maintenance effort then I think it's better to just
keep it the same as it is all the time. The `flake.lock` just allows you to pin inputs and you can update those,
and that requires some effort, or you can keep the same which means you get outdated stuff perhaps, also
security might be something to keep in mind if you use old versions of things, you might have security 
vulnerabilities in those. Most recently, openssl, there is openssl issues so if you run a NixOS system I recommend
updating openssl now. Does this answer the question a bit, a bit better, there is really no like clear, it depends.

Let's check for the openssl version here (checking within nixpkgs local repository)

```nix
> nix-instantiate --eval -A openssl.version
```
We can use `git log --` for specific file, we don't know where the openssl file is. One way, there is `nix edit`,
which allows you to edit specific attribute in a set, if we do `nix edit nixpkgs#openssl` this uses the nix
registry, so it looks up the nixpkgs in the nix registry, points to github nixos packages, it clones that, the 
latest master version, then it opens the file here. 

Alexander Sosedkin: What happens between cloning and opening the file at this line, I suspect that that's the
same magic which is used on search nixos org but how does it trace it down to the specifil line, how does 
that work?

Silvan: Yes, so going from that, starting from nix registry, we can look at the registry here `man nix3 registry`, here 
it has various sources, local registry comes from here

Alexander Sosedkin: I know how registry works, it just looks up that nix packages is a well known name pointing at the
main nix packages repository, how does it go to that. 

Silvan: Right, so we get the flake reference, in the end it will have to import the cloned thing into the store at some
point and for that it should remove the dot git directories and such, and I think git has a builtin way to create these things,
not sure if nix relies on this. Git has the archive, the archive commit `man git archive`.

AS: I still didn't know how it doesn't even find the right file..

Silvan: Oh the right file, I can tell you how it finds the right file, right so how does it get to the openssl file, yes
`nix edit nixpkgs#openssl`. What it does underneath is, let's import nixpkgs here:

```nix
> nix repl '<nixpkgs>'
...
> openssl
<<derivation /nix/store/0y8...

nix-repl> openssl.meta.position
"/nix/var/nix/profiles/per-user...
```
This has the meta dot position that's really all it does, well, the attribute in nix accesses underneath, this contains
both the file and the exact line number, 

AS: That's special to the meta block.

Silvan: Yes, that's special to how meta is handled in nix packages. Let's look at at what exactly it points to
like (opens the same file in vim), line 179, it points to the description (`description = "A cryptographic library
that implements the SSL and TLS protocols";`, so what it does underneath, how meta works underneath and how it gets the 
line it does, `builtins.unsafeGetAttrPos`, this takes one argument which is the attribute name, you want to get 
the file location for, and the second is the attribute set that you want to get it under, here we can go:

```nix
nix-repl> builtins.unsafeGetAttrPos "description" openssl.meta.description
```
Oh no, other way around,

```nix
nix-repl> builtins.unsafeGetAttrPos "description" openssl.meta
{ column = 7; file = "/nix/var/nix/profiles..; line = 179; }
```

This is one of the few ways in which nix allows you to get like impure result but is very useful for error messages

AS: So when nix is evaluating something it not only builds that data structures but also those traces when they are
defined, slow?

Silvan: Ah yes, it does track the position info of alot of things, but it has to do that anyways to get good error 
messages, error messages need to point to location where they have and I don't think it has a big performance impact, 
but yes, certainly not free.

AS: Can you do the same with the flake? Again get the position of description and openssl.meta like..

Silvan: `outputs.legacyPackages.x86_64-linux.openssl.meta.position`, yeah that also works. 

```nix
builtins.unsafeGetAttrPos "description" outputs.legacyPackages.x86_64-linux.openssl.meta
{ column = 7;.. line = 206; }
```

Of course because it's a flake nix code is in a store path. Notably here we see that `unsafeGetAttrPos` has like more
information and also structured information whereas the meta position kind of mangles this into a single string, gets 
rid of the column, a bit unfortunate. Nix underneath can parse this string, and honestly it might mess up if the finding
contains a column here, should we try that? That sounds like fun actually. Let's try this, let's create a new package.
In nix packages we have the directory containing all the packages. We have a adhoc folder structure here (`cd pkgs`) which
is semi regular, there is not a lot of structure that if you find a nice category where it fits you can use that, but
don't worry about making it exact. In here there is subcategories, yeah, and so if you need to create a new package.

```nix
~/src/nixpkgs/pkgs/misc | master ..
> mkdir testPackage
> cd testPackage
> vim default.nix
```
We create a `default.nix` file so we can import it straight away since the `default.nix` is the default nix file. 
Now we create the dependencies that our program has, one of the most standard one is `stdenv`, standardenv provides 
`stdenv.mkDerivation`, I'll give it a name, that's always required `name = "testPackage";`, we give it some native
build inputs, let's say we wanna use `jq` at build time, usually this (`buildPhase`) by default would just call make
but we don't have a make file, instead let's set our own build phase, if you override the build phase a good 
convention is to run the pre build and post build hooks. This way people will be able to..

```nix
{ stdenv, jq }:
stdenv.mkDerivation {
  name = "testPackgage";

  nativeBuildInputs = [
    jq
  ];

  # By running the hooks, .overrideAttrs (old: {
  #   preBuild = ''
  #   '';
  #   works
  buildPhase = ''
    runHook preBuild
    runHook postBuild
  '';

}
```
So in here (between `runHook`) let's then do `jq`, we pass it `-n` for, it doesn't take any input, let's say
we create some result, `{ someResult: 10 }`, read this to `$out`, let's say we don't have an `installPhase` 
for now, or is `dontInstall` a thing, let's try that:

```nix
buildPhase = ''
  runHook preBuild

  jq -n '{ someResult = 10 }' > $out

  runHook postBuild
'';

dontInstall = true;
```

Trying it out. Next thing we have this default here now, we go back to packages and then into
`/top-level/all-packages.nix`. This is a huge file, and here, so find a good place to put the package,
it doesn't matter a whole bunch in the end, that to avoid merge conflicts, I'd argue just search for
some letters that look similar, maybe also by category, here for example we put it into `misc`, we see
there is some misc here.. there is some t's here, ok let's put it here and we do the callPackage pattern here:
`testPackage = callPackage ../misc/testPackage { };`, we don't have to setup `default.nix` because this is 
the default, and in the argument here we can override individual packages a bit, for example `jq` could be
an alternative version of jq if there was one (inside `{ }`) yeah and this is all you need to be able to
test the package so then you can go to the root directory, run a `nix-build -A testPackage` and it will
try to build the package (.. builds error). Oh yeah we don't have a source, by default make derivation expects 
a source so let's go back to the test package, let's set, also let's change `stdenv.mkDerivation` to just
`runCommand`, runCommand is just a very simple builder that just takes a single command to run, in this case
we really only need this

19.18


