ck3d: I have a pull request open, I hope we can discuss it here, it's this one,

Silvan: Yeah, let's go to nixpkgs, `https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs`, (goes to pull requests),
`https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs/186314`.

> Link changed. The title of this pull request was:
> nixos: Add control for systemd representation #186314
> We can find this merged under a different title:
> https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/186314 titled: 
> nixos: Add option to influence override strategies in systemd units

ck3d: I think we can start with the second issue, so the main problem by `grahamc`:
https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/135557, and the question is how can we define,
it's about the template system of systemd, and the special case here, here he want's to make
an instance called `systemd.services."foo@example" = {};` and what we expect is that 
`foo@example` is an instance of `foo@`, but in systemd, ne, in NixOS, what we do here is
defining a new service which replaces the template

Silvan: Yeah, and so the PR here attempts to fix that?

ck3d: Yeah

Silvan: Should we just take a quick look at the PR and see what it does, maybe give a quick
review, is this your PR?

ck3d: Yes, it's my PR

Silvan: Ah, I see so you are ck3d, nice, yeah we can take a look here. We can't go into like
super details here but we can take a look.

ck3d: It's not too complex. So introduce a new option in `nixos/lib/systemd-lib.nix`, so the first one
is called `representation` (note: later changed to `overrideStrategy`):

```nix
overrideStrategy = mkOption {
  default = "asDropinIfExists";
  type = types.enum [ "asDropinIfExists" "asDropin" ];
  description = lib.mdDoc ''
    Defines how unit configuration is provided for systemd:
 
   `asDropinIfExists` creates a unit file when no unit file is provided by the package
    otherwise a drop-in file name `overrides.conf`.
   
   `asDropin` creates a drop-in file named `overrides.conf`.
    Mainly needed to define instances for systemd template units (e.g. `systemd-nspawn@mycontainer.service`).
   
    See also systemd.unit(1).
  '';
};
```

Is representation a right name?

Silvan: A right name, so this is defines how unit configuration is provided (represented) for systemd..

> Note: Not sure how to go about this episode, there is much back and forth communication and reading the code

Silvan: The markdown documentation is available now in NixOS modules, (`description = lib.mdDoc`), that's really
nice, so I see you are already using the literals.

By the way really cool thing about systemd if you haven't known about this already, `man systemd.directives` is a
manpage which is an index for all the systemd terms, so we have all the options here, not just options, all the
individual commands and stuff

