Silvan: All right so yeah, just to re-iterate we have some people from outside of tweag joining now,
open to the public now, we're like half tweagers, half from outside, so that's awesome, so yeah, open
to anyone, any questions, things they want to have taken a look at, issues, PR's, anything nix really.

Quentin Aristote: I do have a question. I know about overriding and overlays and it's useful but, and so for 
example what you can do is you have a packages as nix packages and if you want to change the input you 
can use that to change the input and thats nice, but what am I supposed to do when you want to change 
something that is not in the arguments of the function that defines the package, for example if you 
want to change the source, I just want to go to different commits of the package I want to build, 
but I want to reuse the build file that is in nix package, how do I do that?

Silvan: Yeah, good question. I'm gonna share the screen here, we open like a `test.nix` file. 

```
vim test.nix  
```

So I guess you're asking so if you have like nixpkgs here:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};
```

And I guess let's add an overlay in here:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {};
in pkgs.hello
```

And you have some overlays:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      ()
    ]
  };
in pkgs.hello
```

Like this, `self`, `super`, let's use `final` and `prev`, a bit more intuitive, all right:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello =
      })
    ];
  };
in pkgs.hello
```

So now, generally you'd do, so you are asking about, we have like `hello = prev.hello.override`,
to do like, let's look at the `hello` derivation what that has:

```
> 'hello/default.nix' 
```
> Note: Currently, it's found under `hello/package.nix`

Here, so these are the arguments:

```nix
{
  callPackage,
  lib,
  stdenv,
  fetchurl,
  nixos,
  testers,
  versionCheckHook,
  hello,
}:
```

So these are the arguments that `.override` overrides but I guess you want to override the source here:

```nix
  src = fetchurl {
    url = "mirror://gnu/hello/hello-${finalAttrs.version}.tar.gz";
    hash = "sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=";
  };
```

and so this would be `.overrideAttrs`. The naming is a bit weird and the functions don't work exactly
the same way but this is the general kind of mapping, so all the attributes are `.overrideAttrs`,
so if you go in here:

```
vim test.nix
```

Let's do like an override first, to do like, oh I forget what the arguments were:

```
vim pkgs/by-name/he/hello/package.nix
```

We have like, `fetchurl`, let's make `fetchurl` throw an error:

```nix
let 
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = prev.hello.override {
          fetchurl = throw "not fetchurl";
        };
      })
    ];
  };
in pkgs.hello
```

So that works, let's make sure we can evaluate this, I'm gonna run a, I guess `:!nix-build test.nix`:

```nix
nix-build test.nix
error: not fetchurl
(use '--show-trace' to show detailed location information)

shell returned 1
```

> Note: currently the error has more output:

```nix
nix-build test-v1-fetchurl-error.nix
error:
       … while calling the 'derivationStrict' builtin
         at <nix/derivation-internal.nix>:34:12:
           33|
           34|   strict = derivationStrict drvAttrs;
             |            ^
           35|

       … while evaluating derivation 'hello-2.12.1'
         whose name attribute is located at /nix/store/lifi3q1an6mgsksd52hizhhjfj1yf6sg-nixos/nixos/pkgs/stdenv/generic/make-derivation.nix:375:7

       … while evaluating attribute 'src' of derivation 'hello-2.12.1'
         at /nix/store/lifi3q1an6mgsksd52hizhhjfj1yf6sg-nixos/nixos/pkgs/by-name/he/hello/package.nix:16:3:
           15|
           16|   src = fetchurl {
             |   ^
           17|     url = "mirror://gnu/hello/hello-${finalAttrs.version}.tar.gz";

       (stack trace truncated; use '--show-trace' to show the full, detailed trace)

       error: not fetchurl
```

OK, that works. It's not fetchurl. Oh, but now I guess we could try this, we could add the overrideAttrs:

```nix
hello = (prev.hello.override {
  fetchurl = throw "not fetchurl";
}).
```

and we are gonna override the source to not use fetchurl so we get a working something like, 
we can do this with `overrideAttrs`:

```nix
hello = (prev.hello.override {
  fetchurl = throw "not fetchurl";
}).overrideAttrs
```

One notable difference, which I think it's still the case is that `overrideAttrs` takes a function,
(`overrideAttrs (`), not.. it always takes a function, `override` can take an attribute set directly 
here: (`{fetchurl = throw "not fetchurl";}`) or it can take a function that return an attribute set, 
`overrideAttrs` is a bit different in that it always needs a function. So here `.overrideAttrs (`, 
the argument what people generally call that I think it's `drv:` or `oldAttrs: {}`, something like that. 
The argument here (`oldAttrs: `) represents the old attributes that were passed to the derivation, 
and so here we also have access to like the source, we can say `src = oldAttrs.src;`. Doesn't change
anything but we have access to that. Sometimes it's useful when you want to do like `nativeBuildInputs`
so you want to add some build tooling, some tooling onto your (used? 4.39) build time, if you just
do something like this:

```nix
nativeBuildInputs = [ ];
```

Let's do `final.` let's say `jq`:

```nix
nativeBuildInputs = [
  final.jq
];
```

Anything really. So this would clear `nativeBuildInputs`, it would remove all the  old entries,
so to get around this you generally do `oldAttrs.nativeBuildInputs` plus (`++`), list append
all the old entries and the new one, though sometimes I think that can happen,
`nativeBuildInputs`doesn't exist as an attribute so it wasn't even defined so then you need
a an additional `or` here:

```nix
nativeBuildInputs = oldAttrs.nativeBuildInputs or [] ++ [
  final.jq
];
```

Because to, just to have a default in case it doesn't exist, that is sometimes a bit..

Yuriy Taraday: Isn't it defined by the derivation?

Silvan: It might be, I'm not entirely sure, I guess let's actually test this, it might
be good thing here, let's test it just like that:

```nix
let 
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = (prev.hello.override {
          fetchurl = throw "not fetchurl";
        }).overrideAttrs. (oldAttrs: {
          src = oldAttrs.src;
          
          nativeBuildInputs = oldAttrs.nativeBuildInputs ++ [
            final.jq
          ];
        });
      ];
    };
in pkgs.hello
```

There is a discussion on how `or` has higher precedence.

Now he comments on a new style in writing:

```nix
stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs: {
  pname = "hello";
  version = "2.12.1";
})
```

This is kind of written in a new style here where make derivation takes a function returning
an attribute. Generally it was always like this (without) but this then pushed people to using
the `rec` here because in this case you want to use the version and how do you not duplicate the
version, you do that by, you could do that with a `rec`, this makes it a recursive attribute set,
where all the values are brought into scope, but this is a very local thing, like just local
through this definition and it's not propagated outside of that so in the end the values are
still kind of duplicated at the nix structure where this string doesn't know `url = ...{version}..`,
if you change the version it's gonna keep the old verison here. Recently it was added that you
can use a function here and then the function argument here then refers to the actual final
attributes even if they have been changed by overrides and such. 

OK, now an example is shown:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = (prev.hello.override {
          }).overrideAttrs (finalAttrs: {
            version = "2.12";

            nativeBuildInputs = (finalAttrs.nativeBuildInputs or []) ++ [
              final.jq
            ];
          }); 
        })
      ];
    };
  };
in
pkgs.hello
```

Then Silvan tests it with `nix-repl> hello = import ./test.nix`, and then inspects
it with `hello.src.url` and such. Then changes:

```nix
nix-repl> hello_3 = hello.overideAttrs (finalAttrs: {version = "3"; })
```
Oh, so he says this wouldn't work with `rec` way of doing. `rec` always keeps the old one.

Yuri: Isn't fetchurl also, does it produce derivation, shouldn't it also have override uppers? (what?) something?
Silvan: Let's see.

Now it gets super complex and interesing, lot's of testing and ideas. Too complex for me atm, around 19.00 to 30.00 mark.
Yuri is talking something about adding a new sha to overiddeAttrs?

So Silvan continues with editing the:

```nix
src = finalAttrs.src.overrideAttrs (finalAttrs': {
  sha256 = "";
});
```

```nix

let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = (prev.hello.override {
          }).overrideAttrs (finalAttrs: {
            version = "2.12";

            src = finalAttrs.src.overrideAttrs (finalAttrs': {
              sha256 = "";
            });
          }); 
        })
      ];
    };
in
pkgs.hello
```

But this doesn't work with:

```bash
error: hash mismatch in fixed-output derivation '/nix/store/m4ixpqzfqkdskbq272gmd9jg23vyirfy-hello-2.12.tar.gz.drv':
         specified: sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=
            got:    sha256-zwSvhtwIUmjF9EcPuuSbGK+8Iht4CWqrhC2TSna60Ks=
error: 1 dependencies of derivation '/nix/store/s511gxxwpk116sj0zxj7zhz88fxasp8y-hello-2.12.drv' failed to build
```

So they change the `sha256` to stream of 0's. To type many zeros (how many?) in helix type 0 in insert mode, exit
insert mode with <Esc>, then type `64.` to repeat the last inserted character 64 times. `.` is the Helix command
for "repeat last change".

Also Silvan has useful aliases in the shell:
```bash
alias nb
nb=nix-build

alias ns
ns=nix-shell

alias ne
ne=nix-instantiate --eval
```
Now, they try to test it in nix repl since this doesn't work. Open up the `nix repl` and import the
`test1.nix` as `hello = import ./test1.nix`, then try `hello.src`, `hello.src.version`, `hello.src.sha256`.
Then Silvan asks can we build the source derivation with: `:b hello.src`, and we get a tarball (all this inside 
the nix repl), but then says "this sounds wrong... oh I know the problem". Silvan thinks the `src` part isn't valid
because we are overriding attributes of the final derivation, we aren't overriding attributes of the
function call for fetchurl. Now Silvan mentions an issue: `hello.src // { type = "";}` and says: I already 
talked about this at the NixCon where, Yuri also knows this as well, where the nix repl doesn't show 
the actual derivation attributes by default because derivations have a derivation type in here
`hello.src // { type = "derivation"; }`, but if we override this to something like an empty string, or anything
other than derivation we can see all the attributes:


```nix
nix-repl> hello = import ./test1.nix

nix-repl> hello.src // { type = ""; }
{
  SSL_CERT_FILE = "/no-cert-file.crt";
  __ignoreNulls = true;
  __structuredAttrs = false;
  all = [ ... ];
  args = [ ... ];
  buildInputs = [ ... ];
"/nix/store/p6k7xp1lsfmbdd731mlglrdj2d66mr82-bash-5.2p37/bin/bash";
  cmakeFlags = [ ... ];
  configureFlags = [ ... ];
  curlOpts = "";
  curlOptsList = "";
  depsBuildBuild = [ ... ];
  depsBuildBuildPropagated = [ ... ];
  depsBuildTarget = [ ... ];
  depsBuildTargetPropagated = [ ... ];
  depsHostHost = [ ... ];
  depsHostHostPropagated = [ ... ];
  depsTargetTarget = [ ... ];
  depsTargetTargetPropagated = [ ... ];
  doCheck = false;
  ...
```
And these are the actual attributes that `.overrideAttrs` overrides. These are what gets passed to the
derivation builder underneath so in here we can override the `sha256` but that's just an environment 
variable. If we actually look at the implementation of fetchurl (he checks now the `default.nix` of 
fetchurl) and points to:

```nix
...
# New-style output content requirements
inherit (hash_) outputHashAlgo outputHash;
```
So we shouldn't override the `sha256` but this `outputHash` property but that's a bit weird, and like
an implementation detail almost so. (Now it gets subtle and complex, I'd need to write out everything)

23.36 It get's complex and interesting, but eventually we get this solution:

```nix
# For now, this is probably the best general solution
src = final.fetchurl {
  url = finalAttrs.src.url;
  sha256 = "";
}
```
... I need to watch this at some later date, there is much to unpack here.

