Question: I know about overriding and overlays and it's useful but, and so for example what you can do
is you have a packages as nix packages and if you want to change the input you can use that to change
the input and thats nice, but what am I supposed to do when you want to change something that is not in
the arguments of the function that defines the package, for example if you want to change the source, 
I just want to go to different commits of the package, but I want to reuse the build file that is in 
nix package, how do I do that?

A: Yeah, good question.

```nix
let 
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = 
      })
    ];
  };
in pkgs.hello
```
And now generally you'd do, so you are asking about, we have like `hello = prev.hello.override`,
Let's look at the `hello` derivation. Note: he checks the arguments within the nixpkgs repo 
searching for `hello/default.nix`. 

So these are the arguments that `.override` overrides but I guess you want to override the source here
(`src = fetchurl..`) and so this would be `.overrideAttrs`. The naming is a bit weird so if you go here.

Let's make `fetchurl` throw an error:

```nix
let 
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = prev.hello.override {
          fetchurl = throw "not fetchurl";
        };
      })
    ];
  };
in pkgs.hello
```
Let's make sure we can evaluate this, I'm gonna run I guess `:!nix-build test.nix`. OK, that works.
Oh, but now I guess we could try this, we could add the override attrs and we are gonna override the 
source to not use fetchurl so we get a working something like, we can do this with `overrideAttrs`, one
notable difference, which I think it's still the case is that `overrideAttrs` takes a function, it 
always takes a function, `override` can take an attribute set directly here: `{fetchurl = throw 
"not fetchurl";}` or it can take a function that return an attribute set, `overrideAttrs` is a bit 
different than that in that it always needs a function. So here `.overrideAttrs ()`, the argument 
what people generally call that I think it's `drv:` or `oldAttrs: {}`, something like that. The argument
here represents the old attributes that were passed to the derivation, and so here we also have access to
source, we can say `.overriddeAttrs (oldAttrs: { src = oldAttrs.src; });`

```nix
.overrideAttrs (oldAttrs: {
  src = oldAttrs.src;

  nativeBuildInputs = oldAttrs.nativeBuildInputs or [] ++ [
    final.jq
  ];
});
```

There is a discussion on how `or` has higher precedence.

Now he comments on a new style in writing:

```nix
stdenv.mkDerivation (finalAttrs: {
  pname = "hello";
  version = "2.12.1";
})
```

This is kind of written in a new style here where make derivation takes a function returning
an attribute. Generally it was always like this (without) but this then pushed people to using
the `rec` here because in this case you want to use the version and how do you not duplicate the
version, you do that by, you could do that with a `rec`, this makes it a recursive attribute set,
where all the values are brought into scope, but this is a very local thing, like just local
through this definition and it's not propagated outside of that so in the end the values are
still kind of duplicated at the nix structure where this string doesn't know `url = ...{version}..`,
if you change the version it's gonna keep the old verison here. Recently it was added that you
can use a function here and then the function argument here then refers to the actual final
attributes even if they have been changed by overrides and such. 

OK, now an example is shown:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = (prev.hello.override {
          }).overrideAttrs (finalAttrs: {
            version = "2.12";

            nativeBuildInputs = (finalAttrs.nativeBuildInputs or []) ++ [
              final.jq
            ];
          }); 
        })
      ];
    };
  };
in
pkgs.hello
```

Then Silvan tests it with `nix-repl> hello = import ./test.nix`, and then inspects
it with `hello.src.url` and such. Then changes:

```nix
nix-repl> hello_3 = hello.overideAttrs (finalAttrs: {version = "3"; })
```
Oh, so he says this wouldn't work with `rec` way of doing. `rec` always keeps the old one.

Yuri: Isn't fetchurl also, does it produce derivation, shouldn't it also have override uppers? (what?) something?
Silvan: Let's see.

Now it gets super complex and interesing, lot's of testing and ideas. Too complex for me atm, around 19.00 to 30.00 mark.
Yuri is talking something about adding a new sha to overiddeAttrs?

So Silvan continues with editing the:

```nix
src = finalAttrs.src.overrideAttrs (finalAttrs': {
  sha256 = "";
});
```

```nix

let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> {
    overlays = [
      (final: prev: {
        hello = (prev.hello.override {
          }).overrideAttrs (finalAttrs: {
            version = "2.12";

            src = finalAttrs.src.overrideAttrs (finalAttrs': {
              sha256 = "";
            });
          }); 
        })
      ];
    };
in
pkgs.hello
```

But this doesn't work with:

```bash
error: hash mismatch in fixed-output derivation '/nix/store/m4ixpqzfqkdskbq272gmd9jg23vyirfy-hello-2.12.tar.gz.drv':
         specified: sha256-jZkUKv2SV28wsM18tCqNxoCZmLxdYH2Idh9RLibH2yA=
            got:    sha256-zwSvhtwIUmjF9EcPuuSbGK+8Iht4CWqrhC2TSna60Ks=
error: 1 dependencies of derivation '/nix/store/s511gxxwpk116sj0zxj7zhz88fxasp8y-hello-2.12.drv' failed to build
```

So they change the `sha256` to stream of 0's. To type many zeros (how many?) in helix type 0 in insert mode, exit
insert mode with <Esc>, then type `64.` to repeat the last inserted character 64 times. `.` is the Helix command
for "repeat last change".

Also Silvan has useful aliases in the shell:
```bash
alias nb
nb=nix-build

alias ns
ns=nix-shell

alias ne
ne=nix-instantiate --eval
```
Now, they try to test it in nix repl since this doesn't work. Open up the `nix repl` and import the
`test1.nix` as `hello = import ./test1.nix`, then try `hello.src`, `hello.src.version`, `hello.src.sha256`.
Then Silvan asks can we build the source derivation with: `:b hello.src`, and we get a tarball (all this inside 
the nix repl), but then says "this sounds wrong... oh I know the problem". Silvan thinks the `src` part isn't valid
because we are overriding attributes of the final derivation, we aren't overriding attributes of the
function call for fetchurl. Now Silvan mentions an issue: `hello.src // { type = "";}` and says: I already 
talked about this at the NixCon where, Yuri also knows this as well, where the nix repl doesn't show 
the actual derivation attributes by default because derivations have a derivation type in here
`hello.src // { type = "derivation"; }`, but if we override this to something like an empty string, or anything
other than derivation we can see all the attributes:


```nix
nix-repl> hello = import ./test1.nix

nix-repl> hello.src // { type = ""; }
{
  SSL_CERT_FILE = "/no-cert-file.crt";
  __ignoreNulls = true;
  __structuredAttrs = false;
  all = [ ... ];
  args = [ ... ];
  buildInputs = [ ... ];
"/nix/store/p6k7xp1lsfmbdd731mlglrdj2d66mr82-bash-5.2p37/bin/bash";
  cmakeFlags = [ ... ];
  configureFlags = [ ... ];
  curlOpts = "";
  curlOptsList = "";
  depsBuildBuild = [ ... ];
  depsBuildBuildPropagated = [ ... ];
  depsBuildTarget = [ ... ];
  depsBuildTargetPropagated = [ ... ];
  depsHostHost = [ ... ];
  depsHostHostPropagated = [ ... ];
  depsTargetTarget = [ ... ];
  depsTargetTargetPropagated = [ ... ];
  doCheck = false;
  ...
```
And these are the actual attributes that `.overrideAttrs` overrides. These are what gets passed to the
derivation builder underneath so in here we can override the `sha256` but that's just an environment 
variable. If we actually look at the implementation of fetchurl (he checks now the `default.nix` of 
fetchurl) and points to:

```nix
...
# New-style output content requirements
inherit (hash_) outputHashAlgo outputHash;
```
So we shouldn't override the `sha256` but this `outputHash` property but that's a bit weird, and like
an implementation detail almost so. (Now it gets subtle and complex, I'd need to write out everything)

23.36 It get's complex and interesting, but eventually we get this solution:

```nix
# For now, this is probably the best general solution
src = final.fetchurl {
  url = finalAttrs.src.url;
  sha256 = "";
}
```
... I need to watch this at some later date, there is much to unpack here.

